Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the antihypertensives and vasodilators. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the antihypertensives and vasodilators. How would you classify them?
The antihypertensive drugs are classified by their mechanism and site of action.
The main groups are: the drugs acting on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system —
the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and the angiotensin-receptor blockers;
the calcium-channel blockers, divided into the dihydropyridines acting on vessels
and the non-dihydropyridines acting on the heart; the beta-blockers; the diuretics,
chiefly the thiazides; the alpha-adrenoceptor blockers;
the centrally acting agents, such as clonidine and methyldopa;
and the direct vasodilators, such as hydralazine,
the nitrates and sodium nitroprusside.
The vasodilators may be grouped by whether they act predominantly on arteries,
reducing afterload, on veins, reducing preload, or on both.
So they are organised by mechanism — renin-angiotensin blockade,
calcium-channel blockade, adrenergic blockade,
diuresis and direct vasodilatation — which determines their effects,
adverse effects and place in therapy.
Describe the drugs acting on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
The angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors, such as ramipril and enalapril,
block the conversion of angiotensin one to the potent vasoconstrictor angiotensin
two, reducing vasoconstriction and aldosterone secretion,
so they lower blood pressure and afterload and are valuable in heart failure,
after myocardial infarction and in diabetic and other chronic kidney disease,
where they are renoprotective.
Their characteristic adverse effects are a dry cough,
from accumulation of bradykinin; hyperkalaemia; deterioration of renal function,
particularly in renal artery stenosis; first-dose hypotension; and, rarely,
angioedema.
The angiotensin-receptor blockers, such as losartan,
block the angiotensin-two receptor directly,
with similar effects but without the cough, since they do not affect bradykinin.
So these agents block the renin-angiotensin system to lower pressure and protect
the heart and kidney, with cough, hyperkalaemia and renal effects as the main
cautions.
Describe the calcium-channel blockers.
The calcium-channel blockers inhibit the L-type calcium channel,
reducing calcium entry, and they fall into two clinically distinct groups.
The dihydropyridines, such as amlodipine and nifedipine,
act predominantly on vascular smooth muscle,
causing arterial vasodilatation and so lowering blood pressure and afterload,
with little direct cardiac effect, though the vasodilatation may cause a reflex
tachycardia, ankle oedema, flushing and headache.
The non-dihydropyridines, verapamil and diltiazem, act on the heart,
slowing the rate and atrioventricular conduction and reducing contractility,
used for rate control and angina as well as hypertension,
and they are negatively inotropic, so they are avoided in heart failure and with
beta-blockers.
So the dihydropyridines are vascular vasodilators for hypertension,
and the non-dihydropyridines act on the heart,
the distinction being fundamental to their safe use.
Describe the nitrates and glyceryl trinitrate.
The nitrates, of which glyceryl trinitrate is the prototype,
are vasodilators that act by being metabolised to nitric oxide,
which activates guanylate cyclase in vascular smooth muscle,
raising cyclic GMP and causing relaxation.
They act predominantly on the venous capacitance vessels, reducing preload,
and on the coronary arteries, and at higher doses on the arteries,
reducing afterload.
Their reduction of preload and coronary dilatation makes them valuable in angina
and in acute heart failure and pulmonary oedema,
and glyceryl trinitrate is used by infusion for these and for controlled
hypotension.
Their main limitations are headache and hypotension,
and the development of tolerance with continuous exposure,
which is avoided by a nitrate-free interval.
So the nitrates are nitric-oxide donors acting mainly on veins and coronaries,
useful in angina and heart failure, limited by headache, hypotension and tolerance.
Describe sodium nitroprusside and hydralazine.
Sodium nitroprusside is a powerful,
rapidly acting direct vasodilator that releases nitric oxide to dilate both
arteries and veins, reducing both afterload and preload,
given by infusion for hypertensive emergencies and controlled hypotension,
with an effect that begins and ends within minutes, allowing precise titration.
Its great hazard is that its metabolism releases cyanide,
which is detoxified to thiocyanate,
so prolonged or high-dose infusion risks cyanide toxicity,
with a metabolic acidosis, and thiocyanate accumulation in renal failure;
it must be protected from light and used with care.
Hydralazine is a direct arteriolar vasodilator, reducing afterload,
used in hypertension including in pregnancy and by bolus for acute severe
hypertension; it causes a reflex tachycardia and fluid retention,
and with chronic use a drug-induced lupus syndrome.
So nitroprusside is the titratable arterial-and-venous dilator with a cyanide risk,
and hydralazine an arteriolar dilator useful in pregnancy.
Describe the centrally acting agents and the alpha-blockers.
The centrally acting agents reduce sympathetic outflow from the brainstem by
stimulating central alpha-two adrenoceptors.
Clonidine and the related dexmedetomidine lower blood pressure and heart rate and
provide sedation and analgesia, clonidine also being used for its sympatholytic
effects and in withdrawal states, with rebound hypertension on abrupt cessation.
Methyldopa, a prodrug acting through a central metabolite,
is notable as a safe antihypertensive in pregnancy.
The alpha-adrenoceptor blockers cause vasodilatation by blocking alpha-one-mediated
vasoconstriction: doxazosin is used in hypertension and in benign prostatic
hyperplasia; phenoxybenzamine, an irreversible alpha-blocker,
and phentolamine are used to control the blood pressure of phaeochromocytoma before
and during surgery, by blocking the effects of the excess catecholamines.
So the central agents reduce sympathetic outflow,
methyldopa being used in pregnancy, and the alpha-blockers cause vasodilatation,
with a special role in phaeochromocytoma.
How are antihypertensives managed in the perioperative period?
Most antihypertensives are continued through the perioperative period to maintain
control and avoid rebound, but two groups need particular thought.
Beta-blockers are continued, because abrupt withdrawal causes rebound tachycardia
and ischaemia, but not started acutely and untitrated.
The drugs acting on the renin-angiotensin system — the
angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers — are
associated with significant hypotension on induction,
refractory to the usual vasopressors,
so it is common to omit them on the morning of surgery,
particularly for major surgery, although practice varies and the decision balances
this against the indication.
Diuretics are often omitted on the day. Clonidine is continued to avoid rebound.
So the general rule is to continue antihypertensives,
with the specific exceptions of often holding the renin-angiotensin blockers on the
day, not starting beta-blockers acutely,
and managing the rebound risk of clonidine and beta-blockers.
How is a hypertensive emergency managed?
A hypertensive emergency is severe hypertension with acute,
ongoing target-organ damage — such as encephalopathy, acute heart failure,
aortic dissection or eclampsia — and it requires controlled,
monitored reduction of the blood pressure with an intravenous, titratable agent,
in a monitored environment, often with invasive arterial pressure measurement.
The key principle is to lower the pressure gradually,
by a limited amount over the first hours, not abruptly to normal,
because an over-rapid fall can cause cerebral, coronary or renal hypoperfusion.
The agents used include labetalol, glyceryl trinitrate, sodium nitroprusside, and,
in specific contexts, others; the choice depends on the clinical setting — for
instance, a beta-blocker and vasodilator in aortic dissection,
magnesium and labetalol or hydralazine in eclampsia.
So a hypertensive emergency is treated by gradual, titrated,
monitored reduction with an intravenous agent chosen for the clinical context.
What is controlled hypotension, and how is it achieved?
Controlled, or deliberate, hypotension is the intentional lowering of the blood
pressure during anaesthesia to reduce surgical bleeding and improve the operative
field, used for certain procedures such as some major orthopaedic,
middle-ear and other surgery.
It is achieved by a combination of techniques — deepening anaesthesia with volatile
or intravenous agents, using vasodilators such as glyceryl trinitrate or sodium
nitroprusside, beta-blockers such as esmolol to control rate and pressure,
and remifentanil to obtund responses — titrated to a target pressure.
It requires careful patient selection,
avoiding it where organ perfusion is already marginal,
invasive arterial monitoring, and attention to maintaining perfusion of the brain,
heart and kidneys, with the head positioned appropriately.
So controlled hypotension uses titratable vasodilators,
beta-blockade and deep anaesthesia to lower pressure for a bloodless field,
with vigilant monitoring of organ perfusion.
What special considerations attach to the drug management of phaeochromocytoma?
Phaeochromocytoma, a catecholamine-secreting tumour,
requires careful pharmacological preparation before surgery to prevent dangerous
hypertensive surges.
The cardinal principle is to establish alpha-adrenoceptor blockade first,
with an agent such as phenoxybenzamine or doxazosin,
over a period of days to weeks, to control the blood pressure and allow the
contracted intravascular volume to expand.
Only after adequate alpha-blockade is a beta-blocker added if needed to control
tachycardia or arrhythmia — never before,
because unopposed alpha stimulation from beta-blockade in the presence of high
catecholamines can precipitate a hypertensive crisis.
Intraoperatively, surges on tumour handling are managed with short-acting agents —
phentolamine, sodium nitroprusside, glyceryl trinitrate,
esmolol — and hypotension after the tumour is removed,
from the sudden fall in catecholamines, with fluids and vasopressors.
So the rule is alpha-blockade before beta-blockade,
with short-acting agents for intraoperative surges.
Pull it together: how do you use these agents rationally?
I would choose the antihypertensive by the patient's comorbidities and the clinical
context: drugs acting on the renin-angiotensin system for heart failure,
post-infarction and chronic kidney disease,
with attention to renal function and potassium; calcium-channel blockers,
the dihydropyridines for hypertension and the non-dihydropyridines where rate
control is also wanted; beta-blockers for their antiarrhythmic,
anti-anginal and prognostic benefits; and methyldopa or labetalol in pregnancy.
Perioperatively I would continue most agents,
often hold the renin-angiotensin blockers and diuretics on the day,
not start beta-blockers acutely, and avoid the rebound of abrupt clonidine or
beta-blocker withdrawal.
For acute control I would use titratable intravenous vasodilators and
beta-blockers, lowering pressure gradually in an emergency,
and I would follow the alpha-before-beta rule in phaeochromocytoma.
So rational use matches the agent to the comorbidity and context,
manages the perioperative exceptions, and uses titratable agents for acute control.
Describe the physiology of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is a key regulator of blood pressure and
volume. Renin is released from the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney in response
to a fall in renal perfusion pressure, reduced sodium delivery to the macula densa,
and sympathetic stimulation.
Renin cleaves angiotensinogen, from the liver, to angiotensin one,
which the angiotensin-converting enzyme, chiefly in the lung,
converts to angiotensin two.
Angiotensin two is a potent vasoconstrictor, raising systemic vascular resistance;
it stimulates aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex,
promoting sodium and water retention;
it enhances sympathetic activity and thirst and antidiuretic hormone release;
and it constricts the renal efferent arteriole, maintaining glomerular filtration.
So the system raises blood pressure and conserves volume through vasoconstriction
and sodium retention, and it is the target of the converting-enzyme inhibitors,
the receptor blockers and the aldosterone antagonists,
which explains both their effects and their adverse effects.
Explain the renal mechanism of ACE inhibitors and the effect on the efferent
arteriole.
Angiotensin two preferentially constricts the glomerular efferent arteriole,
which raises the pressure within the glomerulus and so helps maintain the
filtration rate when renal perfusion is reduced.
The angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors, by reducing angiotensin two,
dilate the efferent arteriole, lowering the intraglomerular pressure.
This has two faces.
It is protective in the long term, reducing the glomerular hypertension that drives
progression in diabetic and other chronic kidney disease,
which is why these drugs are renoprotective and reduce proteinuria.
But it can acutely reduce the filtration rate, causing a rise in creatinine,
and in states dependent on efferent constriction to maintain filtration — notably
bilateral renal artery stenosis or severe hypovolaemia — it can precipitate acute
kidney injury.
So by dilating the efferent arteriole these drugs lower intraglomerular pressure,
protecting the kidney chronically but risking acute injury where filtration depends
on efferent constriction.
Compare ACE inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers, including angioedema.
Both reduce the effect of the renin-angiotensin system and lower blood pressure
with renoprotective and cardiac benefits, but they differ mechanistically.
The converting-enzyme inhibitors block the formation of angiotensin two and also
reduce the breakdown of bradykinin;
the accumulation of bradykinin causes the characteristic dry cough and contributes
to angioedema.
The receptor blockers block the angiotensin-two receptor directly,
without affecting bradykinin, so they do not cause the cough and are used as an
alternative in patients who develop it;
angioedema is much less common with them but can still occur.
Both cause hyperkalaemia and can impair renal function,
and both are contraindicated in pregnancy and in bilateral renal artery stenosis.
Angioedema is a potentially life-threatening swelling of the lips,
tongue and airway requiring drug cessation and airway management.
So the receptor blockers avoid the bradykinin-mediated cough,
with otherwise similar effects and cautions to the converting-enzyme inhibitors.
Describe the adverse effects of the dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine
calcium-channel blockers.
The dihydropyridines, such as amlodipine and nifedipine,
by causing arterial vasodilatation, produce the adverse effects of vasodilatation:
flushing, headache, palpitations from a reflex tachycardia, and ankle oedema,
the last from increased capillary pressure rather than fluid retention and not
relieved by diuretics.
Short-acting nifedipine can cause an abrupt fall in pressure with reflex
tachycardia and is avoided.
The non-dihydropyridines, verapamil and diltiazem, by their cardiac action,
cause bradycardia, atrioventricular block and worsening of heart failure through
negative inotropy, and verapamil characteristically causes constipation;
they are dangerous combined with beta-blockers because of additive depression of
rate and conduction.
So the dihydropyridines cause vasodilatory effects and ankle oedema,
and the non-dihydropyridines cause bradycardia, block,
heart-failure precipitation and, with verapamil, constipation,
the difference again reflecting their vascular versus cardiac selectivity.
Explain nitrate tolerance and how it is avoided.
Nitrate tolerance is the loss of haemodynamic effect that develops within hours of
continuous exposure to a nitrate, so that a sustained infusion or continuous patch
becomes progressively less effective.
Its mechanism is incompletely understood but involves impaired conversion of the
nitrate to nitric oxide, oxidative stress and neurohormonal counter-regulation with
fluid retention. It is clinically important because it limits continuous nitrate
therapy.
It is avoided by providing a nitrate-free interval each day — typically overnight
for a patient on patches or oral nitrates — allowing the response to be restored,
and by not relying on continuous infusion for sustained effect.
So nitrate tolerance develops rapidly with continuous exposure through impaired
nitric-oxide generation and counter-regulation,
and is prevented by a daily nitrate-free interval,
an important practical point in prescribing nitrates.
How is cyanide toxicity from sodium nitroprusside recognised and managed?
Sodium nitroprusside contains cyanide groups,
which are released as the drug acts and are normally detoxified by combination with
thiosulphate to thiocyanate, excreted by the kidney.
With prolonged or high-dose infusion the capacity to detoxify is exceeded and
cyanide accumulates, inhibiting cellular respiration.
It is recognised by a developing metabolic acidosis with a raised lactate,
a rising mixed venous oxygen saturation as tissues cannot extract oxygen,
and tachyphylaxis to the drug's effect, with later features of toxicity;
thiocyanate accumulates in renal failure causing its own toxicity.
It is prevented by limiting the dose and duration.
Management is to stop the drug and give an antidote — sodium thiosulphate to
provide substrate for detoxification, hydroxocobalamin to bind cyanide, and,
in severe cases, other cyanide antidotes — with supportive care.
So cyanide toxicity presents with a lactic acidosis and tachyphylaxis,
prevented by dose limitation and treated by stopping the drug and giving
thiosulphate or hydroxocobalamin.
Describe the centrally acting alpha-two agonists clonidine and dexmedetomidine in
this context.
Clonidine and dexmedetomidine lower blood pressure by stimulating central alpha-two
adrenoceptors, reducing sympathetic outflow, and they reduce heart rate.
Beyond their antihypertensive effect they provide sedation,
anxiolysis and analgesia without significant respiratory depression,
which gives them several anaesthetic uses: as sedatives,
dexmedetomidine particularly for a cooperative,
rousable sedation in critical care and procedures;
as adjuncts that reduce anaesthetic and opioid requirements and blunt the stress
and haemodynamic response to surgery; as additives prolonging regional blocks;
and in the management of withdrawal states and shivering.
Their adverse effects are bradycardia, hypotension and sedation,
and clonidine causes rebound hypertension if stopped abruptly after chronic use.
So the central alpha-two agonists lower pressure while providing sedation and
analgesia, with valuable anaesthetic adjunct roles, limited by bradycardia,
hypotension and, for clonidine, rebound hypertension.
What drugs are used in pulmonary hypertension?
Pulmonary arterial hypertension is treated with drugs that target the pulmonary
vasculature through three main pathways.
The nitric-oxide pathway is augmented by the phosphodiesterase-five inhibitors,
such as sildenafil, which raise cyclic GMP, and by inhaled nitric oxide itself,
a selective pulmonary vasodilator used acutely.
The prostacyclin pathway is augmented by prostacyclin and its analogues,
such as epoprostenol and iloprost, potent pulmonary vasodilators given by infusion
or inhalation.
The endothelin pathway is blocked by the endothelin-receptor antagonists,
such as bosentan, endothelin being a pulmonary vasoconstrictor.
Newer agents include the soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator riociguat.
The aim is to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance and right ventricular afterload.
In the perioperative setting, inhaled nitric oxide and prostacyclin are valuable as
selective pulmonary vasodilators.
So pulmonary hypertension is treated through the nitric-oxide,
prostacyclin and endothelin pathways,
with inhaled agents useful for selective acute pulmonary vasodilatation.
Outline the stepped pharmacological management of essential hypertension.
Guidelines such as those of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
set out a stepped approach.
The first-line choice depends on age and ethnicity:
a converting-enzyme inhibitor or receptor blocker in younger, non-black patients,
in whom the renin-angiotensin system is more active,
and a calcium-channel blocker in older patients and those of black African or
Caribbean origin.
The second step combines these two. The third step adds a thiazide-like diuretic.
At the fourth step, resistant hypertension,
a further agent is added according to the serum potassium — a low-dose aldosterone
antagonist such as spironolactone if potassium is low or normal,
or an alpha- or beta-blocker if it is high — and specialist referral is considered.
Throughout, lifestyle measures and treatment of cardiovascular risk accompany the
drugs. So management is a stepwise combination guided by age,
ethnicity and potassium, escalating to spironolactone in resistant hypertension.
How is hypertension managed in pregnancy and pre-eclampsia?
Hypertension in pregnancy requires drugs safe for the fetus,
so the converting-enzyme inhibitors and receptor blockers are contraindicated
because they cause fetal harm. The established oral agents are labetalol,
methyldopa and nifedipine.
Pre-eclampsia — hypertension with proteinuria or other organ involvement after
twenty weeks — requires control of severe hypertension,
with intravenous labetalol or hydralazine, or oral nifedipine,
to prevent maternal cerebral haemorrhage, lowering pressure in a controlled manner.
Magnesium sulphate is given to prevent and treat the seizures of eclampsia,
and is the treatment of choice for that purpose, not as an antihypertensive.
The definitive treatment of pre-eclampsia is delivery.
So pregnancy hypertension is treated with labetalol, methyldopa or nifedipine,
avoiding renin-angiotensin blockers,
and pre-eclampsia additionally with controlled pressure reduction and magnesium for
seizure prophylaxis, with delivery as the cure.
How is the blood pressure managed in acute aortic dissection?
Acute aortic dissection requires rapid,
aggressive control of both the blood pressure and the force of cardiac contraction
to reduce the shear stress — the rate of rise of aortic pressure — that propagates
the dissection.
The key principle is to reduce the heart rate and contractility first with an
intravenous beta-blocker, such as labetalol or esmolol,
before or alongside a vasodilator, because giving a vasodilator alone causes a
reflex tachycardia and increased shear that can extend the dissection.
Once the rate is controlled, a vasodilator such as sodium nitroprusside or glyceryl
trinitrate is added to bring the systolic pressure down to a low target,
around one hundred to one hundred and twenty millimetres of mercury,
balanced against organ perfusion, with adequate analgesia.
So dissection is managed by beta-blockade first to reduce rate and shear,
then a vasodilator to a low pressure target,
with the order being critical to avoid reflex worsening.
Why does the timing and choice matter when stopping renin-angiotensin blockers
before surgery?
Patients on a converting-enzyme inhibitor or receptor blocker are prone to
significant hypotension on induction of anaesthesia,
because the blunting of the renin-angiotensin system removes a key compensatory
vasoconstrictor response to the vasodilatation and reduced venous return of
anaesthesia, and this hypotension can be refractory to the usual catecholamine
vasopressors, sometimes requiring vasopressin.
To reduce this, many centres omit these drugs on the morning of surgery,
particularly for major surgery with expected fluid shifts,
while others continue them, especially where they are treating heart failure.
The decision balances the risk of induction hypotension against the indication and
the risk of poorer control. If continued,
one anticipates and is prepared to treat the hypotension,
including with vasopressin.
So the timing matters because these drugs predispose to refractory induction
hypotension, leading to the common practice of omitting them on the day,
individualised to the patient and surgery.
What is the role of alpha-blockers beyond phaeochromocytoma?
Beyond their essential role in phaeochromocytoma,
the alpha-one-adrenoceptor blockers have other uses.
Doxazosin and similar agents lower blood pressure by blocking alpha-one-mediated
vasoconstriction and are used as add-on antihypertensives,
particularly in resistant hypertension.
They relax the smooth muscle of the bladder neck and prostate,
improving urinary flow in benign prostatic hyperplasia, a common indication.
Their adverse effects include postural hypotension, especially a first-dose effect,
and they can cause the intra-operative floppy iris syndrome during cataract
surgery, which the ophthalmologist should be warned about.
Phentolamine, a short-acting non-selective alpha-blocker,
is used for hypertensive crises including phaeochromocytoma surges and to treat
extravasation of vasoconstrictors.
So the alpha-blockers are used in resistant hypertension and in benign prostatic
hyperplasia, with postural hypotension and floppy iris syndrome as notable effects,
in addition to their central role in phaeochromocytoma.
Summarise the perioperative handling of the main antihypertensive classes.
In summary: beta-blockers are continued, since withdrawal causes rebound ischaemia,
but not started acutely and untitrated. Calcium-channel blockers are generally
continued.
The converting-enzyme inhibitors and receptor blockers are often omitted on the
morning of surgery because of refractory induction hypotension,
particularly for major surgery, though continued by some,
especially in heart failure.
Diuretics are commonly omitted on the day to avoid volume depletion.
Central alpha-two agonists such as clonidine are continued to avoid rebound
hypertension. Alpha-blockers for phaeochromocytoma are continued as part of
preparation.
The underlying principle is to maintain control and avoid rebound while
anticipating the specific interaction of each class with anaesthesia,
especially the induction hypotension of the renin-angiotensin blockers.
So most agents are continued, with the renin-angiotensin blockers and diuretics the
usual exceptions held on the day, and beta-blockers and clonidine never stopped
abruptly.
Describe the clinical uses of the nitrates in ischaemia and heart failure.
The nitrates are used across ischaemic and failure syndromes.
In stable angina, glyceryl trinitrate sublingually relieves and prevents anginal
episodes, and longer-acting oral nitrates such as isosorbide mononitrate provide
background prophylaxis, with a nitrate-free interval to avoid tolerance.
In acute coronary syndromes, intravenous glyceryl trinitrate relieves ischaemic
pain and reduces preload.
In acute heart failure and pulmonary oedema,
intravenous glyceryl trinitrate is valuable,
its venodilatation reducing preload and pulmonary congestion rapidly,
with arterial dilatation reducing afterload at higher doses.
The combination of hydralazine and a nitrate improves survival in chronic heart
failure, particularly in those unable to take renin-angiotensin blockers.
The limitations throughout are headache, hypotension and tolerance.
So the nitrates relieve angina, reduce preload in acute coronary syndromes and
pulmonary oedema, and, combined with hydralazine,
improve survival in heart failure, their venodilator action central to these uses.
Describe nicorandil and other potassium-channel openers.
Nicorandil is an antianginal vasodilator with a dual mechanism: it is a nitrate,
donating nitric oxide to dilate the venous and coronary vessels,
and it is a potassium-channel opener,
activating the ATP-sensitive potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle to cause
arterial vasodilatation, so it reduces both preload and afterload and dilates the
coronaries.
It is used in angina, particularly as an add-on when other agents are insufficient.
Its characteristic and troublesome adverse effect is ulceration — oral,
anal and gastrointestinal — which can be severe and is a reason to stop the drug,
besides the headache and hypotension of vasodilators.
The potassium-channel-opening mechanism is shared with some other vasodilators such
as minoxidil.
So nicorandil combines nitrate and potassium-channel-opening vasodilatation for
angina, distinctive for causing ulceration,
illustrating the potassium-channel-opener class of vasodilators.
What is the role of magnesium and other agents in hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy?
Magnesium sulphate has a central, specific role in severe pre-eclampsia and
eclampsia: it is given to prevent and to treat eclamptic seizures,
being superior to conventional anticonvulsants for this purpose,
and it is not primarily an antihypertensive.
Its mechanism in seizure prevention is incompletely understood but includes
cerebral vasodilatation and membrane stabilisation.
It requires monitoring for toxicity — loss of reflexes,
respiratory depression and cardiac effects — with calcium gluconate as the
antidote, and it potentiates neuromuscular blockers, relevant to anaesthesia.
The hypertension itself is controlled with labetalol, hydralazine or nifedipine.
So in the hypertensive disorders of pregnancy,
magnesium sulphate is the agent for seizure prophylaxis and treatment,
distinct from the antihypertensives,
with toxicity monitoring and an interaction with neuromuscular blockers that the
anaesthetist must remember.
How do you approach secondary hypertension?
Secondary hypertension — hypertension with an identifiable underlying cause —
should be considered particularly in the young, in resistant hypertension,
and where there are suggestive features,
because treating the cause may cure or greatly improve the hypertension and because
some causes have specific drug implications.
The causes include renal disease and renal artery stenosis,
where renin-angiotensin blockers are effective but hazardous in bilateral stenosis;
primary hyperaldosteronism, Conn's syndrome,
treated with spironolactone or surgery; phaeochromocytoma,
requiring alpha- then beta-blockade; Cushing's syndrome; coarctation of the aorta;
and drug causes such as the combined oral contraceptive, corticosteroids,
and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
The approach is to screen for these where indicated and direct treatment at the
cause.
So secondary hypertension is sought in the young and the resistant,
with causes such as renal disease, hyperaldosteronism and phaeochromocytoma each
carrying specific drug implications,
and its identification can transform management.
Describe the specific agents used in a hypertensive emergency by clinical context.
The choice of agent in a hypertensive emergency is tailored to the clinical
context, all given intravenously and titrated, with gradual reduction.
In hypertensive encephalopathy, labetalol or nicardipine allow controlled reduction.
In acute aortic dissection, a beta-blocker such as labetalol or esmolol is given
first to reduce shear, then a vasodilator. In acute pulmonary oedema with
hypertension, glyceryl trinitrate reduces preload and afterload.
In phaeochromocytoma crisis, phentolamine and short-acting agents.
In eclampsia, labetalol or hydralazine with magnesium.
In acute kidney injury or after stroke, careful,
modest reduction to preserve perfusion.
Sodium nitroprusside is a powerful titratable option but carries the cyanide risk.
So the emergency agent is chosen for the context — beta-blockade first in
dissection, nitrates in pulmonary oedema,
labetalol in encephalopathy and eclampsia,
alpha-blockade in phaeochromocytoma — always with controlled, gradual reduction.
What is the rationale for combining antihypertensive agents?
Combining agents from different classes is rational because it produces additive or
synergistic blood-pressure lowering while allowing lower doses of each,
reducing dose-dependent adverse effects,
and because the classes counteract each other's compensatory responses.
For example, a vasodilator such as a dihydropyridine causes a reflex tachycardia
and fluid retention, which a beta-blocker and a diuretic respectively counteract;
a renin-angiotensin blocker mitigates the fluid retention and the hypokalaemia of a
diuretic.
Fixed-dose combinations improve adherence. The stepped guidelines embody this,
combining a renin-angiotensin blocker or calcium-channel blocker with a diuretic
and then a fourth agent.
The combinations to avoid are those with additive harm,
such as a non-dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker with a beta-blocker.
So combination therapy gives additive efficacy at lower doses and counteracts
compensatory responses, which is why most hypertension is treated with more than
one agent, chosen to complement rather than to compound risk.
Discuss minoxidil and the more powerful arterial vasodilators.
Minoxidil is a potent arterial vasodilator that acts by opening ATP-sensitive
potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle,
producing marked arteriolar dilatation and a large fall in blood pressure,
reserved for severe, resistant hypertension.
Its powerful vasodilatation provokes strong compensatory responses — a reflex
tachycardia and substantial sodium and fluid retention — so it must be given with a
beta-blocker and a loop diuretic to control these,
or it causes tachycardia and oedema.
It also causes hypertrichosis, excessive hair growth,
which led to its topical use for hair loss.
It illustrates the general problem of the powerful direct arterial vasodilators,
including hydralazine: their efficacy is offset by reflex tachycardia and fluid
retention requiring co-administered agents.
So minoxidil is a potassium-channel-opening arterial vasodilator for resistant
hypertension, requiring a beta-blocker and diuretic to control its reflex
tachycardia and fluid retention, and notable for causing hypertrichosis.
What blood-pressure targets are used, and is there a J-curve?
Blood-pressure targets are set by guidelines and individualised.
In general, treatment aims for a clinic pressure below about one hundred and forty
over ninety millimetres of mercury, with a lower target,
around one hundred and thirty over eighty,
in higher-risk groups such as those with diabetes or established cardiovascular or
renal disease, and targets relaxed somewhat in the very elderly and frail.
The J-curve hypothesis proposes that lowering the diastolic, or the pressure,
too far may reduce coronary and organ perfusion and increase events,
producing a J-shaped relationship between pressure and risk,
of particular concern in those with coronary disease,
in whom coronary perfusion occurs in diastole.
The evidence is debated, but it counsels against over-aggressive reduction,
especially of the diastolic, in vulnerable patients.
So targets are individualised, generally below one hundred and forty over ninety
with lower targets in high-risk groups,
tempered by the J-curve concern against excessive lowering in those with coronary
disease.
How are the alpha-two agonists used for shivering, withdrawal and as adjuncts?
The central alpha-two agonists, clonidine and dexmedetomidine,
have several adjunctive anaesthetic uses beyond lowering pressure.
They are effective in treating postoperative shivering,
clonidine reducing the shivering threshold disturbance.
They attenuate the sympathetic overactivity of withdrawal states — from alcohol,
opioids and other drugs — and dexmedetomidine is used for cooperative sedation in
this context.
As anaesthetic adjuncts they reduce anaesthetic and opioid requirements,
provide analgesia, blunt the haemodynamic stress response to surgery and to
extubation, and, added to local anaesthetic, prolong regional and neuraxial blocks.
Dexmedetomidine provides a rousable sedation in critical care without much
respiratory depression. Their limiting effects are bradycardia,
hypotension and sedation.
So the alpha-two agonists are versatile adjuncts — for shivering, withdrawal,
sedation, stress-response attenuation and block prolongation — reflecting their
sympatholytic, sedative and analgesic actions,
a frequently examined aspect of this class.
Summarise the vasodilators by their site of action.
Grouping the vasodilators by where they act clarifies their effects.
The predominantly venous dilators reduce preload: the nitrates,
chiefly glyceryl trinitrate, useful in angina,
acute coronary syndromes and pulmonary oedema.
The predominantly arterial dilators reduce afterload: hydralazine, minoxidil,
and the dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers, causing reflex tachycardia.
The mixed arterial and venous dilators reduce both: sodium nitroprusside,
the titratable agent for emergencies with its cyanide risk,
and the converting-enzyme inhibitors and receptor blockers acting through the
renin-angiotensin system.
The selective pulmonary vasodilators — inhaled nitric oxide and prostacyclin —
reduce pulmonary vascular resistance. And the centrally acting agents reduce
sympathetic outflow.
So classifying by venous, arterial, mixed,
pulmonary and central action predicts each vasodilator's haemodynamic effect and
clinical niche, which is the organising principle for their rational use.
Give a final synthesis of antihypertensive and vasodilator use.
I would treat chronic hypertension by the stepped, guideline-based approach,
choosing first-line agents by age and ethnicity — renin-angiotensin blockers in the
younger, calcium-channel blockers in the older and in black patients — combining
classes to gain additive effect and counteract compensatory responses,
adding a diuretic and then spironolactone for resistance,
and matching the choice to comorbidities such as heart failure, ischaemia,
diabetes and pregnancy, where labetalol, methyldopa and nifedipine are used.
I would seek secondary causes in the young and resistant.
For acute control I would use titratable intravenous agents chosen for the context,
lowering pressure gradually, beta-blockade first in dissection,
and following the alpha-before-beta rule in phaeochromocytoma.
Perioperatively I would continue most agents,
often hold the renin-angiotensin blockers and diuretics on the day,
and avoid abrupt beta-blocker or clonidine withdrawal.
So rational use is stepped, comorbidity-matched, context-specific for emergencies,
and mindful of the perioperative exceptions.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Antihypertensives are grouped by mechanism:
renin-angiotensin blockers (ACE inhibitors, ARBs),
calcium-channel blockers (vascular dihydropyridines vs cardiac
verapamil/diltiazem), beta-blockers, diuretics, alpha-blockers,
central alpha-2 agonists, and direct vasodilators.
Second, ACE inhibitors lower pressure and protect heart and kidney but cause cough
(bradykinin), hyperkalaemia, renal impairment (especially renal artery stenosis)
and angioedema; ARBs are similar without the cough.
Third, Nitrates/GTN are nitric-oxide donors acting mainly on veins and coronaries
(preload, angina, heart failure; tolerance with continuous use);
sodium nitroprusside dilates arteries and veins for titratable control but risks
cyanide toxicity; hydralazine is an arteriolar dilator useful in pregnancy.
Fourth, Perioperatively: continue most antihypertensives,
but often omit ACE inhibitors/ARBs (refractory induction hypotension) and diuretics
on the day; don't start beta-blockers acutely;
avoid rebound from abrupt clonidine or beta-blocker withdrawal.
Fifth, In phaeochromocytoma, establish alpha-blockade before any beta-blockade
(unopposed alpha causes crisis); treat hypertensive emergencies by gradual titrated
intravenous reduction; controlled hypotension uses titratable vasodilators,
beta-blockade and deep anaesthesia with vigilant organ-perfusion monitoring.
Thank you. That concludes the station.